docs/puj/PagodaShadowsPage030.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "PÓ-THAH SIÂ-YIÁᴺ (Tŏiⁿ 30 hio̍h)"
date:   2022-07-14 18:00:00 +0800
tag: PUJ_translation
---

{% include puj-style.html %}
{% include changlog-table-style.html %}

<!-- In walking, the small-footed lean on a child's shoulder or use a supporting staff. -->
&nbsp;&nbsp;Siáu-khiáu-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi, kiâⁿ-lōu tio̍h che̍k-chhiú huāⁿ piⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;thâu nou-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi koiⁿ-thâu a-sĭ kṳ̂ ki kuáiⁿ-chiăng.
<!-- 注：“拄”拐杖 的 “拄” 义，声调暂按《菲尔德词典》中所注（kṳ̂），译者对该音所记忆声调（kṳ̆）有点不甚确定，待确定后若有差异再注明。 -->
<!-- Those who can afford it, have large-footed female slaves who carry them about on their backs, for short distances. -->
Hṳ́-tshoh ŭ-chîⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi, che̍k-tsăm-kiáⁿ-lōu iā kiò kâi tuā-kha-nôu-pĭ iăng(iă) i lâi-lâi-khṳ̀-khṳ̀.
<!-- I have been to visit a wealthy family and had the neighbouring ladies come in to see me, each riding pick-a-back on her slave. -->
Uá pat khṳ̀-kuè che̍k-ke ŭ-chîⁿ-nâng-ke &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, liáu in tshù-piⁿ-thâu-bué hiá hu-jîn&#x002D;&#x002D;hué lóng che̍k-nâng khiâ che̍k-kâi nôu-pĭ lâi thóiⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;uá.
<!-- A lady, whose beautiful house I went to see, was as gracious a hostess as could be found in any land; -->
Uá pat khṳ̀-kuè che̍k-ūi tshù-lăi kuè-ngiá &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi hu-jîn &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, chí-ūi hu-jîn sĭ uá kìⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;kuè kak-kok-nâng hṳ́-tói siăng ŭ-kheh-chhêng &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi nâng;
<!-- but her feet were so tiny that the longest walk she could take was from one room to the next, and she was obliged to sit down after walking a few steps on her marble floors. -->
put-kuè i sang-kha khah-sòi, siăng-hn̆g tsŭ-sĭ kiâⁿ kuè-khṳ̀ sio-keh-pâng-koiⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, liáu tŏ tuā-lí-chio̍h tsng-thiaⁿ kiâⁿ bô-kúi-pōu tsŭ-tio̍h tsŏ lo̍h-lâi hiah-he̍k.
<!-- I have seen those whose feet were but two inches long upon the sole, and their shoes were no larger than those of a young infant. -->
Uá pat thóiⁿ-kuè ŭ-nâng kha-tói tn̂g-sì chiàⁿ ngŏu-kong-hun &#x002D;&#x002D;tiaⁿ, i&#x002D;&#x002D;nâng sang-ôi huáⁿ₊ bô kâi tshut-sì-nou-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi hiòⁿ tuā.
<!-- Only the very rich can afford to be so helpless as such feet render their possessor, and there are not many who are very rich. -->
Tio̍h hiá ke-sṳ̄ kuè-ŭ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi chiàⁿ năi-ŏi-tit-khṳ̀ chiá chhi-liâng(chhi-lău-tshám) kha-kiáⁿ tǹg ŭ-lián-mīn, sĭ-tàⁿ chiòⁿ ŭ-ke-sṳ̄ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi to bŏi-tsōi.

<!-- Middle-class women, with bound feet, sometimes walk four or five miles in a day. -->
&nbsp;&nbsp;Ke-sṳ̄ tong-pān-tong-pān iŭ tîⁿ-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng, lân-sî che̍k-jît tio̍h kiâⁿ-tio̍h⁎ che̍k-nŏⁿ-phòu-lōu.
<!-- Many whose feet are apparently bound have natural shaped feet, merely dressed in the style of the bound-footed. -->
Che̍k-tshoh tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng thóiⁿ-tio̍h ŭ-tîⁿ-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi sang-kha li iáu khuah-pán(khuah-phiáng), tuaⁿ-tī chhēng-liáu jiân tîⁿ-kha-khuán &#x002D;&#x002D;tiaⁿ.
<!-- In some villages, the girls have their feet slightly bound just before marriage, and unbind them soon after the wedding festivities are past. -->
Che̍k-tshoh hioⁿ-lí &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, hiá tsṳ-niôⁿ-kiáⁿ sin-hun-tsôiⁿ ké-ì zuăn &#x002D;&#x002D;tîⁿ-ē-kha, liáu tuā-lói kiâⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;kuè tsŭ méⁿ-méⁿ pit-pak-tiāu.
<!-- In some hamlets the women are all large-footed, and wade streams and walk long distances bare-footed; -->
Che̍k-tshoh hioⁿ-lí-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng kâi-kâi tuā-kha, kiâⁿ-hn̆g-lōu kah ĕ(lŏm) khoi-tsúi lóng pak-chhiah-kha;
<!-- but on approaching a town, and on gala days, they do up their feet, more or less successfully, in the aristocratic style. -->
liáu khṳ̀-kàu koi-chhĭ a-sĭ lîm-tshún tsò-tsoih, i&#x002D;&#x002D;nâng tsŭ lia̍h sang-kha pau &#x002D;&#x002D;khí-lâi, ke-kiám pun &#x002D;&#x002D;nâng thóiⁿ-tio̍h iáu chiàⁿ-keng &#x002D;&#x002D;kò-kiáⁿ.
<br>

<br>

***[前页](PagodaShadowsPage029.html)***
***[后页](PagodaShadowsPage031-032.html)***

---
<br>

#### 变更历史

{:.changelog}

| 更改日期 | 更改信息 |
| --- | --- |
| 2022-07-21 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/1d8672f8946260feaad6cc048bf6a7b807f26c23" target="_blank">remove the rare expression of "only" which might come from affecting by Mandarin</a> |
| 2022-07-21 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/49c59c00f044996e65de2d7594deb7db31855520" target="_blank">add comment and adjust tone of translation of "support"</a> |
| 2022-07-18 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/b59dce077ee6e452b495ea32e70aebd942f9bab0" target="_blank">add translation for "helpless"</a> |
| 2022-07-15 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/aee2a7d788aaf20827db71950fa648d014ccfed3" target="_blank">PagodaShadowsPage030.md complete</a> |
| 2022-07-14 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/6d02da4c3c0f148a7f157af3ea372779f07970ef" target="_blank">add PagodaShadowsPage030-032</a> |

Commit message:

update changelog of PagodaShadowsPage030,062-063 (IGNORE_CHANGELOG)

docs/puj/PagodaShadowsPage030.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "PÓ-THAH SIÂ-YIÁᴺ (Tŏiⁿ 30 hio̍h)"
date:   2022-07-14 18:00:00 +0800
tag: PUJ_translation
---

{% include puj-style.html %}
{% include changlog-table-style.html %}

<!-- In walking, the small-footed lean on a child's shoulder or use a supporting staff. -->
&nbsp;&nbsp;Siáu-khiáu-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi, kiâⁿ-lōu tio̍h che̍k-chhiú huāⁿ piⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;thâu nou-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi koiⁿ-thâu a-sĭ kṳ̂ ki kuáiⁿ-chiăng.
<!-- 注：“拄”拐杖 的 “拄” 义，声调暂按《菲尔德词典》中所注（kṳ̂），译者对该音所记忆声调（kṳ̆）有点不甚确定，待确定后若有差异再注明。 -->
<!-- Those who can afford it, have large-footed female slaves who carry them about on their backs, for short distances. -->
Hṳ́-tshoh ŭ-chîⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi, che̍k-tsăm-kiáⁿ-lōu iā kiò kâi tuā-kha-nôu-pĭ iăng(iă) i lâi-lâi-khṳ̀-khṳ̀.
<!-- I have been to visit a wealthy family and had the neighbouring ladies come in to see me, each riding pick-a-back on her slave. -->
Uá pat khṳ̀-kuè che̍k-ke ŭ-chîⁿ-nâng-ke &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, liáu in tshù-piⁿ-thâu-bué hiá hu-jîn&#x002D;&#x002D;hué lóng che̍k-nâng khiâ che̍k-kâi nôu-pĭ lâi thóiⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;uá.
<!-- A lady, whose beautiful house I went to see, was as gracious a hostess as could be found in any land; -->
Uá pat khṳ̀-kuè che̍k-ūi tshù-lăi kuè-ngiá &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi hu-jîn &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, chí-ūi hu-jîn sĭ uá kìⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;kuè kak-kok-nâng hṳ́-tói siăng ŭ-kheh-chhêng &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi nâng;
<!-- but her feet were so tiny that the longest walk she could take was from one room to the next, and she was obliged to sit down after walking a few steps on her marble floors. -->
put-kuè i sang-kha khah-sòi, siăng-hn̆g tsŭ-sĭ kiâⁿ kuè-khṳ̀ sio-keh-pâng-koiⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, liáu tŏ tuā-lí-chio̍h tsng-thiaⁿ kiâⁿ bô-kúi-pōu tsŭ-tio̍h tsŏ lo̍h-lâi hiah-he̍k.
<!-- I have seen those whose feet were but two inches long upon the sole, and their shoes were no larger than those of a young infant. -->
Uá pat thóiⁿ-kuè ŭ-nâng kha-tói tn̂g-sì chiàⁿ ngŏu-kong-hun &#x002D;&#x002D;tiaⁿ, i&#x002D;&#x002D;nâng sang-ôi huáⁿ₊ bô kâi tshut-sì-nou-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi hiòⁿ tuā.
<!-- Only the very rich can afford to be so helpless as such feet render their possessor, and there are not many who are very rich. -->
Tio̍h hiá ke-sṳ̄ kuè-ŭ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi chiàⁿ năi-ŏi-tit-khṳ̀ chiá chhi-liâng(chhi-lău-tshám) kha-kiáⁿ tǹg ŭ-lián-mīn, sĭ-tàⁿ chiòⁿ ŭ-ke-sṳ̄ &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi to bŏi-tsōi.

<!-- Middle-class women, with bound feet, sometimes walk four or five miles in a day. -->
&nbsp;&nbsp;Ke-sṳ̄ tong-pān-tong-pān iŭ tîⁿ-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng, lân-sî che̍k-jît tio̍h kiâⁿ-tio̍h⁎ che̍k-nŏⁿ-phòu-lōu.
<!-- Many whose feet are apparently bound have natural shaped feet, merely dressed in the style of the bound-footed. -->
Che̍k-tshoh tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng thóiⁿ-tio̍h ŭ-tîⁿ-kha &#x002D;&#x002D;kâi sang-kha li iáu khuah-pán(khuah-phiáng), tuaⁿ-tī chhēng-liáu jiân tîⁿ-kha-khuán &#x002D;&#x002D;tiaⁿ.
<!-- In some villages, the girls have their feet slightly bound just before marriage, and unbind them soon after the wedding festivities are past. -->
Che̍k-tshoh hioⁿ-lí &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, hiá tsṳ-niôⁿ-kiáⁿ sin-hun-tsôiⁿ ké-ì zuăn &#x002D;&#x002D;tîⁿ-ē-kha, liáu tuā-lói kiâⁿ&#x002D;&#x002D;kuè tsŭ méⁿ-méⁿ pit-pak-tiāu.
<!-- In some hamlets the women are all large-footed, and wade streams and walk long distances bare-footed; -->
Che̍k-tshoh hioⁿ-lí-kiáⁿ &#x002D;&#x002D;kò, tsṳ-niôⁿ-nâng kâi-kâi tuā-kha, kiâⁿ-hn̆g-lōu kah ĕ(lŏm) khoi-tsúi lóng pak-chhiah-kha;
<!-- but on approaching a town, and on gala days, they do up their feet, more or less successfully, in the aristocratic style. -->
liáu khṳ̀-kàu koi-chhĭ a-sĭ lîm-tshún tsò-tsoih, i&#x002D;&#x002D;nâng tsŭ lia̍h sang-kha pau &#x002D;&#x002D;khí-lâi, ke-kiám pun &#x002D;&#x002D;nâng thóiⁿ-tio̍h iáu chiàⁿ-keng &#x002D;&#x002D;kò-kiáⁿ.
<br>

<br>

***[前页](PagodaShadowsPage029.html)***
***[后页](PagodaShadowsPage031-032.html)***

---
<br>

#### 变更历史

{:.changelog}

| 更改日期 | 更改信息 |
| --- | --- |
| 2022-08-01 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/fe079b86b0721157479e55d62cecc4d27682dd60" target="_blank">fix another expression of "helpless"</a> |
| 2022-07-21 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/9535d4380b2514b205a4695dfc37cbd4705dbc41" target="_blank">update changelog of PagodaShadowsPage030.md (INGORE_CHANGELOG)</a> |
| 2022-07-21 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/1d8672f8946260feaad6cc048bf6a7b807f26c23" target="_blank">remove the rare expression of "only" which might come from affecting by Mandarin</a> |
| 2022-07-21 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/49c59c00f044996e65de2d7594deb7db31855520" target="_blank">add comment and adjust tone of translation of "support"</a> |
| 2022-07-18 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/b59dce077ee6e452b495ea32e70aebd942f9bab0" target="_blank">add translation for "helpless"</a> |
| 2022-07-15 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/aee2a7d788aaf20827db71950fa648d014ccfed3" target="_blank">PagodaShadowsPage030.md complete</a> |
| 2022-07-14 | <a href="https://github.com/DonAnthonyLee/DonAnthonyLee.github.io/commit/6d02da4c3c0f148a7f157af3ea372779f07970ef" target="_blank">add PagodaShadowsPage030-032</a> |
